Add "About Nessie" for humans (#599)
projectnessie/nessie: site/docs/features/index.md

# About Nessie

Nessie is to Data Lakes what git is to source code repositories. Therefore,
Nessie uses many terms from both git and data lakes.

This page explains how Nessie makes working with data in data lakes much easier

> without requiring much prior knowledge of either git nor data lakes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without requiring much prior knowledge of either git or data lakes.
```
either/or versus neither/nor

> Nessie is designed to give users an always-consistent view to their data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nessie is designed to give users an always-consistent view of their data
```

> across all involved data sources (tables). Changes to your data, for example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
across all involved data sets (tables). Changes to your data, for example
```
"set" is maybe a bit more generic than "source" as it could also be a "destination"

from batch jobs, happen independently and are completely isolated. Users will
not see any incomplete changes. Once all the changes are done, all the changes
can be atomically and consistently applied and become visible to your users.

> Nessie completely eliminates the hard and often manual work to keep track

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nessie completely eliminates the hard and often manual work required to keep track
```

of the individual data files. Nessie knows which data files are being used
and which data files can safely be deleted.

> Production and staging and development can use the same data lake without risking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Production, staging and development environments can use the same data lake without risking
```

the consistent state of production data.

Nessie does not copy your data, instead it references the existing data, which
works fine, because data files[^1] are immutable.

## Nessie 101

* Changes to the contents of the data lake are
  [recorded in Nessie](#working-with-data-in-nessie) as *commits* without copying

>   the actual data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the actual data.
```

> * Add [meanings to the changes](#commit-messages-and-more) to your data lake

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add [meanings to the changes](#commit-messages-and-more) to your data lake.
```

> * [Always-consistent](#branches) view to all the data 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Always-consistent](#branches) view of all the data 
```

> * [Always-consistent](#branches) view to all the data 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Always-consistent](#branches) view to all the data.
```

> * Sets of changes, like the whole [work of a distributed Spark job](#working-branches-for-analytics-jobs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Sets of changes, like the whole [work of a distributed Spark job](#working-branches-for-analytics-jobs).
```

>   or [experiments of data engineers](#working-branches-for-humans), are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  or [experiments of data engineers](#working-branches-for-humans) are
```

  isolated in Nessie via *branches*. Failed jobs do not add additional harm to the data.

> * Known, fixed versions of all data can be [tagged](#tags)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Known, fixed versions of all data can be [tagged](#tags).
```

> * Automatic removal of unused data files ([garbage collection](#garbage-collection))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Automatic removal of unused data files ([garbage collection](#garbage-collection)).
```

## Data Lake 101

> *"A data lake is a system or repository of data stored in its natural/raw format,
usually object blobs or files."* (cite from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_lake))

> Data is stored in immutable data files[^1]. Each data file defines the schema of the

Author: Added some more words here.

data (i.e. names and types of the columns) and contains the data. A single,
logical table (for example a `customers` or a `bank_account_transactions` table)
consists of many data files.

New data files can be added to the set of files for a particular table.

> Data files can also contain updates to and deletions of existing data.

Author: Also some more words here.

> Since data lakes contain the history of all that data, it is possible to

Author: You're right. Removed the paragraph.

perform queries against the state of the data as it was at a point in time
in the past.

The amount of data held in data lakes is rather huge (GBs, TBs, PBs), and so
is the number of tables and data files (100s of thousands, millions).

Managing that amount of data and data files while keeping track of schema
changes, for example adding or removing a column, changing a column's type,

> renaming a column in a table ("PDS", physical datasets) and views ("VDS",

Author: Heh, and I thought that "PDS" and "VDS" are fancy DL-y terms.
Nuked those terms.

virtual datasets), is one of the things that Nessie tackles.

Data in a data lake is usually consumed and written using tools like
Apache [Hive](https://hive.apache.org)[^2] or Apache
[Spark](https://spark.apache.org)[^2]. Your existing jobs can easily integrate
Nessie without any production code changes, it's a simple configuration change.

## git 101

> *"Git is a free and open source distributed version control system designed to 
handle everything from small to very large projects with speed and efficiency"*
(cite from [git-scm.com](https://git-scm.com/))

git maintains the history or all changes of a software project from the very
first *commit* until the current state.

git is used by humans, i.e. developers.

Many of the concepts of git for source code are implemented by Nessie for all
the data your data lake. It would be rather confusing to explain all git

> concepts here and then outline the differences in the next chapter.

Author: I think, that's a good and detailed Git start.

## Working with data in Nessie

Each individual state in Nessie is defined by a *Nessie commit*.
Each *commit* in Nessie, except the very first one, has references to its

> predecessors, the previous versions of the data.

Author: Is it even for a merge-operation?

> predecessors, the previous versions of the data.

Reviewer 2: yep

> predecessors, the previous versions of the data.

Author: I think it would be very useful to keep the information about "what" has been merged.
Or, if we stick with the rather "rebase-ish" operation (i.e. apply the "work branch"'s commits onto the main branch), maybe another term would be useful, because the term "merge" has a well defined meaning in Git.
/cc @jacques-n WDYT?

> predecessors, the previous versions of the data.

Author: Changes some paragraphs to reflect this.

> Each *Nessie commit* also "knows" about the data files in your data lake, which

Author: I'll go with "indirectly..." here, because at least for me it was kind of "essential"  in my understanding of Nessie, that the individual commits "indirectly" point to files in the DL.

represent the state of all data in all tables.

The following example illustrates that our *current commit* adds a 3rd data file.
The other two data files 1+2 have been added by *previous commit*.
```
 +-------------------+       +-------------------------+
 |  previous commit  | --<-- |     current commit      |
 +-------------------+       +-------------------------+
     |         |                 |        |        |
   (add)     (add)               |        |      (add)
     |         |                 |        |        |
  +------+  +------+          +------+ +------+ +------+
  | data |  | data |          | data | | data | | data |
  | file |  | file |          | file | | file | | file |
  | #1   |  | #2   |          | #1   | | #2   | | #3   |
  |     _|  |     _|          |     _| |     _| |     _|
  |  __/    |  __/            |  __/   |  __/   |  __/  
  |_/       |_/               |_/      |_/      |_/     
```

> In "relational SQL" you can think of the following sequence of SQL statements:

Reviewer 2: Maybe too technical but pointing out the major difference between normal transactions and Nessie transactions is that they can be distributed: eg 1 spark job could modify `table_one` and another spark job could modify `other_table` in the same _transaction_. Important distinction but perhaps for a more technical audience

> In "relational SQL" you can think of the following sequence of SQL statements:

Author: Doesn't that actually depend on how you actually run your Spark job with Nessie?
IIUC there are many ways how users can use Nessie "transactions" --> Nessie commits
But yea, listing (at least some of) these options is probably helpful (and hopefully not confusing).

> In "relational SQL" you can think of the following sequence of SQL statements:

Reviewer 2: yea, 1 commit is always going to be on 1 spark instance. But if several spark instances commit to the same branch you can achieve a distributed transaction (sort of). This might be an intermediate concept though but it is an important differentiator compared to normal sql databases

> In "relational SQL" you can think of the following sequence of SQL statements:

Author: Added some more words (hopefully not too complicated).

```SQL
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
  -- The data for data file #1
  INSERT INTO table_one (...) VALUES (...);
  -- The data for data file #2
  INSERT INTO other_table (...) VALUES (...);
-- creates our "previous commit"
COMMIT TRANSACTION;

BEGIN TRANSACTION;
  -- Data added to 'table_one' will "land" in a new data file #3, because
  -- data files are immutable.
  INSERT INTO table_one (...) VALUES (...);
-- Creates our "current commit"
COMMIT TRANSACTION; 
```

Each commit is identified by a sequence of hexadecimal characters like
`2898591840e992ec5a7d5c811c58c8b42a8e0d0914f86a37badbeedeadaffe`, which is not

> easy to read and remember for us humans.

Reviewer 2: perhaps add a technical footnote pointing out that its a SHA hash? Dunno if its mentioned elsewhere but the first thing I thought to myself after reading this was 'why'.

### Branches

Nessie uses the concept of "branches" to always reference the *latest* version
in a chain of commits. Our example branch is named "master" and has just
a single commit:
```
 +-------------+
 |  commit #1  |
 +-------------+
        ^
        |
        |

>      "master"

Reviewer 2: nit: main rather than master. Here and elsewhere

Author: s/master/main/ everywhiere

      branch
```
When we add changes to our "master" branch, a new `commit #2` will be created:

* the new `commit #2` will reference `commit #1` as its predecessor and
* the *named reference* "master" will be updated to point to our new `commit #2`

```

>  +-------------+       +-------------+

Reviewer 2: I dig the ascii graphs :-)

      +-----------+       +-----------+
         |
         v
         |
+-----------+ 
| commit #1 | 
+-----------+ 
      ^
      |
      |
   "master"
    branch
```
When the job has finished, you can merge the now consistent result back
into the "master"-branch.
```
          task#1         task#2   "work"
          result         result   branch
            |                |     |
            v                v     v
      +-----------+       +-----------+
      | commit #2 | --<-- | commit #3 |
      +-----------+       +-----------+
         |                          |        
         v                          ^
         |                          |
+-----------+                     +-----------+
| commit #1 | --------<---------- | commit #4 |  
+-----------+                     +-----------+
                                      ^
                                      |
                                      |
                                   "master"
                                    branch
```
Note that the merge-`commit #4` has references to two commits:

* the previous commit on the "master" branch and
* the merged commit from the "work"-branch

> It would be nice to give that `commit #4` a meaningful commit message, like

Reviewer 2: I would move this type of 'advice' to a separate page. A 'Best Practices' page with this stuff and others would be useful

Author: Started a `best-practices.md` page (currently just that single recommendation though).

`aggregate-financial-stuff 2020/12/24`, though, so people that look through the
history of the data can grasp what that commit changes and why it's there.

Before you actually merge the data from a working-branch into the "master" branch,
it is possible to review all the changes made by your job - either programmatically,
like running some process that validates the state of the branch, or asking a human

> to take a look.

Reviewer 2: I like this flow! Here might be a good place to highlight the difference I mentioned above regarding distributed transactions compared to relational dbs

### Working branches for "humans"

You can also use "developer" branches to run experiments against your data, test

> changes of your jobs, etc etc etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changes of your jobs etc.
```

> Production and staging and development can use the same data lake without risking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Production, staging and development environments can use the same data lake without risking
```

the consistent state of production data.

### Squashing commits

> Nessie can also help to reduce the amount of data files in a data lake.

Reviewer 2: Nessie can't (yet) squash commits, would rather not add this section until it can

Author: Added a sentence that squashing isn't supported yet.
Or do you prefer to completely remove the section?

Reviewer 2: i think i would remove it for the time being, don't feel to strongly tho

You can for example merge all data files produces by all tasks of an analytics job
before the whole change is actually merged into the "master" branch. Nessie will
[figure out](#garbage-collection) that only the merged files need to survive and
remove the unused files.

### Tags

> Another type of named references are *tags*. Nessie *tags* are named references

Reviewer 2: perhaps a comparison/link to git tags. Also: 'do not get automatically "moved".' made me think first that tags can be committed to but the ref wont follow the tag. Wonder if there is another way to express how tags work

Author: Added the link and re-phrased.

to specific commits but unlike branches do not get automatically "moved".

*Tags* are useful to reference specific commits, for example a tag named
`financial-data-of-FY2021` could reference all sources of financial data relevant

> used for some FY report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used for some financial year report.
```

### Commit messages and more

> As briefly mentioned above, every commit in Nessie has a bunch of attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As briefly mentioned above, every commit in Nessie has a set of attributes.
```

> The probably most important ones are "summary" and "description", which are exactly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of the more important ones are "summary" and "description", which are exactly
```

that - meaningful summaries and detailed descriptions that explain what has been
changed and why it has been changed. This gives data engineers the ability to know

> why something has changed.

Reviewer: Previous sentence says this too, perhaps reword this one to be something like "These tags provide useful additional context for data engineers when investigating changes to a data set."

Author: Heh, right. Just used other words.
Removed the sentence.

> In addition to "summary" and "description", there are a bunch of additional attributes:

Reviewer 2: Our commit message support is a bit squishy in Nessie currently. The plan is to add mroe structure but right now its just a freehand msg, timestamp and author. Could we skip this section till its better defined?

Author: I've added a sentence explaining that we intend to add more structure to these attributes, so people know that these attributes exist but will get some more structure, given that most commits will be machine-generated ones. WDYT?

| Attribute | Meaning
| --- | ---

> | commit timestamp | the timestamp when the commit has been recorded in Nessie

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| commit timestamp | the timestamp when the commit was recorded in Nessie
```

| committer | the one (human user, system id) that actually recorded the change in Nessie
| author timestamp | the timestamp when a change has been implemented (can be different from the commit timestamp)

> | author | the one (human user, system id) that authored the change. can be different, if someone else actually commits the change to Nessie

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| author | the one (human user, system id) that authored the change, can be different if someone else actually commits the change to Nessie
```

| summary | one-line meaningful summary of the changes
| description | potentially long description of the changes
| ... | there are potentially way more attributes, just too many to mention here

## Garbage collection

Data lakes contain a lot of data. The amount of data has a direct relation to
the cost of ownership of a data lake. Keeping all data forever is probably going
to be just too expensive, practically not useful and can also collide with data
privacy regulations (for example GDPR or CCPA).

> Nessie keeps track of unused data files and collects the garbage for you.

Reviewer 2: worth expanding once we have an algo in place

> ## Terms summary

Reviewer 2: I think this table is super useful. Maybe higher up or on a separate glossary page? W/ a few more comparisons to equivalent git/DBA language?

Author: Just moved the table a bit more towards the top of the page for now.

| Term | Meaning in Nessie
| --- | ---

> | Commit | An atomic change to a set of data files.

Reviewer: I'd suggest using this format of the second column starting with a capital letter and ending with a full stop in the "Attribute | Meaning" table above too.

Author: Yup, applied to the the above table.

      | commit #2 | --<-- | commit #3 |
      +-----------+       +-----------+
         |
         v
         |
+-----------+ 
| commit #1 | 
+-----------+ 
      ^
      |
      |
    "main"
    branch
```
When the job has finished, you can merge the now consistent result back
into the "main"-branch.
```
          task#1         task#2   "work"
          result         result   branch
            |                |     |
            v                v     v
      +-----------+       +-----------+
      | commit #2 | --<-- | commit #3 |
      +-----------+       +-----------+
         |                          |        
         v                          ^
         |                          |
+-----------+                     +-----------+
| commit #1 | --------<---------- | commit #4 |  
+-----------+                     +-----------+
                                      ^
                                      |
                                      |
                                    "main"
                                    branch
```

Technically, Nessie replays `commit #2` and `commit #3` on top of the most-recent
commit of the "main" branch.

> For those who know Git and merge-commits: One important difference of Nessie-merges

Reviewer 2: i feel like this is dupe of above

is that Nessie-commits have only parent (predecessor). Nessie-merge operations
technically work a bit different: the changes in branch to be merged are replayed
on top of the target branch.

> It would be nice to give the commits a meaningful commit messages, like

Reviewer 2: These paragraphs can be removed as they are in FAQ right?
